# Documentation

## localize( languageTag, i18nValue )
Localize the given internationalized object using the given languageTag.

### Parameters
- **languageTag {String}**: The languageTag to lookup a localization with
Maybe undefined if the value is not i18n (app does not use i18n)

- **i18nValue {*}**: A possibly internationalized value:
- When passing a primitive value, it is returned as-is.
- When passing an object, the languageTag is used as a key within that object.


### Returns
- **{*}**: The localized value if found, `undefined` otherwise


## localizeRelaxed( languageTag, i18nValue )
For controls (such as a date-picker), we cannot anticipate all required language tags, as they may be
app-specific. The relaxed localize behaves like localize if an exact localization is available.
If not, the language tag is successively generalized by stripping off the rightmost sub-tags until a
localization is found.
Eventually, a fallback ('en') is used.

### Parameters
- **languageTag {String}**: The languageTag to lookup a localization with.
Maybe `undefined` if the value is not i18n (app does not use i18n)

- **i18nValue {*}**: A possibly internationalized value:
- When passing a primitive value, it is returned as-is.
- When passing an object, the `languageTag` is used as a key within that object.


### Returns
- **{*}**: The localized value if found, `undefined` otherwise


## localizer( languageTag )
Encapsulate a given languageTag in a partially applied localize function.

### Parameters
- **languageTag {String}**: The languageTag to lookup localizations with


### Returns
- **{Function<*|*>}**: A single-arg localize-Function, which always uses the given language-tag
It also has a .format-method, which can be used as a shortcut to
`text.format( localize( x ), args )`


## function Object() { [native code] }#format()
Shortcut to text.format, for simple chaining to the localizer.

These are equal:
- `text.format( i18n.localizer( tag )( i18nValue ), arg1, arg2 )`
- `i18n.localizer( tag ).format( i18nValue, arg1, arg2 )`.

## languageTagFromI18n( String, )
Retrieve the language tag of the current locale from an i18n model object, such as used on the scope.

### Parameters
- **String, {locale:}**: An internationalization model, with reference to the currently active locale and a map from
locales to language tags.


### Returns
- **{String}**: The localized value if found, `undefined` otherwise
